doc: how to create an input (#77)
AdRoll/baker: content/en/docs/How To/create_input.md

---
title: "Create a custom input component"
date: 2020-11-02
weight: 650
---
The input component goal is to retrieve Records in form of bytes and send them to the filterchain.

The input isn't in charge of splitting/parsing the input data into Records (that is done by Baker),
but only retrieving them as fast as possible in raw format adding, if any, metadata to them.

> The input shares a [`*Data`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/AdRoll/baker#Data) channel with the

Author: fixed and rephrased

filter chain. The channel size is customizable with `[input] chansize=<value>` (default to 1024).

To create an input and make it available to Baker, one must:

* Implement the [Input](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/AdRoll/baker#Input) interface
* Add an [`InputDesc`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/AdRoll/baker#InputDesc) for the input to
the available inputs in [`Components`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/AdRoll/baker#Components)

## Daemon vs Batch

The input component determines the Baker behavior between a batch processor or a long-living daemon.

If the input exits when its data processing has completed, then Baker waits the topology to end
and then exits.

If the input never exits, then Baker acts as a daemon.

## Data

The [`Data`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/AdRoll/baker#Data) object that the input must fill in
with read data has two fields: `Bytes` that must contain the raw read bytes (possible contains

> more records) and `Meta`.

Reviewer: Even if that may change in the future, we should say somewhere that `baker.Data.Bytes` must represent `\n`-separated un-serialized records

Author: added

> [`Metadata`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/AdRoll/baker#Metadata) can contain any information
> that the input wants to share with the other components of the pipeline about the chunk of bytes
> produced.  
> Typical information could be the timestamp of the read, details about the source, etc. 
> 
> Those metadata will be associated to each record extracted from `Bytes` and will be available
> to the whole pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`Metadata`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/AdRoll/baker#Metadata) can contain additional 
information Baker will associate with each of the serialized Record contains in `Data`.  
Typical information could be the time of retrieval, the filename (in case `Records` come a file), etc.
```

## The Input interface

```go
type Input interface {
	Run(output chan<- *Data) error
	Stop()
	Stats() InputStats
	FreeMem(data *Data)
}
```

The [Input interface](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/AdRoll/baker#Input) must be implemented when
creating a new input component.

The `Run` function implements the component logic and receives a channel where it sends the
[raw data](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/AdRoll/baker#Data) it processes.

> `FreeMem` is the function called by Baker when a chunk of data has been completely processed and
> its memory can be used again. It's up to the input to choose whether to recycle it or not.  
> An often used pattern is to manage the objects with [`sync.Pool`](https://golang.org/pkg/sync/#Pool),
> see the [TCP](https://github.com/AdRoll/baker/blob/main/input/tcp.go),
> [List](https://github.com/AdRoll/baker/blob/main/input/list.go) or
> [SQS](https://github.com/AdRoll/baker/blob/main/input/sqs.go) inputs for inspiration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`FreeMem(data *Data)` is called by Baker when `data` is no longer needed. This is an occasion
for the input to recycle memory, for example if the input uses a `sync.Pool` to create new 
instances of `baker.Data`. 
```

## InputDesc

```go
var MyInputDesc = baker.InputDesc{
	Name:   "MyInput",
	New:    NewMyInput,
	Config: &MyInputConfig{},

> 	Help:   "Help message for the input",

Reviewer: Maybe instead of `Help message for the input`, something like: `High-level description of MyInput`?

Author: :+1:

}
```

This object has a `Name`, that is used in the Baker configuration file to identify the input,

> a costructor function (`New`), a config object (used to parse the input configuration in the

Reviewer: `costructor` -> `constructor-like`

Why not use list-styled items here? one per field?

nit: the config object is not really _used to parse_ the input configuration, since this could be understood as if it was the Config which parses the TOML.

Author: I didn't use a list here to avoid replicating the code docs and to maintain a more colloquial style, as it's just a brief sentence without too many details

TOML file) and a help text that must help the users to use the component and its configuration
parameters.

> ### Input constructor

Reviewer: In Go these are conventionally called _constructor-like functions_, since they're not technically (nit) constructors, they're just free functions that happen to be used to construct a specific instances of a specific type. 

```suggestion
### Input constructor-like function
```

The `New` key in the `InputDesc` object represents the constructor function.

The function receives a [InputParams](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/AdRoll/baker#InputParams)
object and returns an instance of [Input](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/AdRoll/baker#Input).

The function should verify the configuration params into `InputParams.DecodedConfig` and initialize

> the component. Additional operations can be performed in the `Run` function when called.

Reviewer: I'm not sure of the added value of the last sentence, but maybe I didn't quite get what you meant.

Author: well, I wanted to say that if something isn't feasible in the constructor-like function, one can also use the Run function, but yeah, it's not very clear so I'm removing it

### The input configuration and help

The input configuration object (`MyInputConfig` in the previous example) must export all
configuration parameters that the user can set in the TOML topology file.

Each key in the struct must include a `help` string tag and a `required` boolean tag, both are
mandatory.

The former helps the user to understand the possible values of the field, the latter tells Baker

> whether to refuse a missing configuration param.

Reviewer: :bulb:  **idea** :bulb: 
We should probably list somewhere the types we support for the fields of the Config structures, since we don't support every type there is.

Rather than describing those in each component page, we could have a page dedicated to the Config structs, in which we also list the supported struct tags (`required`, `help` and `default`).

And list this new page here and there.

What do you think?

Author: sounds good, we can also simplify all these components page. I'll leave the page as it is now, when we'll create the suggested page we can rework the components pages removing duplicated info

```go
var MyInputDesc = baker.InputDesc{
	Name:   "MyInput",
	New:    NewMyInput,
	Config: &MyInputConfig{},
	Help:   "High-level description of MyInput",
}
```

This object has a `Name`, that is used in the Baker configuration file to identify the input,
a costructor-like function (`New`), a config object (where the parsed input configuration from the
TOML file is stored) and a help text that must help the users to use the component and its
configuration parameters.

### Input constructor-like function

The `New` key in the `InputDesc` object represents the constructor-like function.

The function receives a [InputParams](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/AdRoll/baker#InputParams)
object and returns an instance of [Input](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/AdRoll/baker#Input).

The function should verify the configuration params into `InputParams.DecodedConfig` and initialize
the component.

### The input configuration and help

The input configuration object (`MyInputConfig` in the previous example) must export all
configuration parameters that the user can set in the TOML topology file.

Each key in the struct must include a `help` string tag and a `required` boolean tag, both are

> mandatory.

Reviewer: `required` is not mandatory. I made this comment on https://github.com/AdRoll/baker/pull/78/files#r521546397 but I haven't seen it here the first time.
There's the same also on the upload PR

Author: fixed!
